[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hello, [INAUDIBLE].
Lilou here.
I'm in Windsor in
the United Kingdom.
Here with Linda.
Hello, Linda.
Hi.
How are you?
Very good.
I'm excited to do another
interview for Gaiam TV.
Yeah, yes.
You are the author of
"Marmalade and Machine Guns."
I certainly am.
It's just come out.
Exciting.
Very exciting.
A new baby.
Yeah, I'm a new author.
It's a new baby.
And it literally was
like giving birth.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah.
So we're going to speak
about what you have learned
through-- well, I think in '96,
there was some serious events
that happened in your
life that made you realize
that there was so much more.
That this life was so much more.
And you have reinvented
yourself, if I can say this.
And you have done
huge humanitarian work
all over the world.
I mean, even Richard
Branson said Linda
makes the impossible possible.
What a great adventure.
My goodness.
You've met Richard Branson!
Yeah, I have.
I've had the honor of meeting
him many times actually.
And being-- working as
a consultant for him
in-- for community projects.
So he knows what I
can do firsthand, yes.
And it's a great honor that
he wrote that on my book.
Yeah.
[CLICKS TONGUE] So tell us
what-- tell us about your story
so we can understand
where you're coming from.
Because a lot of
people are changing
their lives-- want
to live and give,
but where do we start from?
So it helps to-- for
us to hear stories,
because then we get inspired.
So what is yours?
You have quite a special one.
Yeah, from a very young
girl, I always felt that I
had a real big purpose in life.
But I had absolutely
no idea what it was
or however I was
going to do that.
Fell in love when I was a
young girl when I was about 16.
And married my Prince Charming
and had two children when I was
quite young in my early 20s.
And went and became--
my career was a nurse.
And I absolutely
adored my nursing.
But became a single mom at
a very young age, as well.
And it wasn't practical
then to remain as a nurse,
because sadly salary as
a nurse is not very good.
So wanting to be a super mom and
to do all the things that we do
and take care of the children
and make sure they had
everything they
needed, I took the step
of taking a job which
gave me more money
and a company car and-- and--
Stress.
[LAUGHTER]
Yes.
And I did it, because of
all the right reasons.
But I forgot to understand
what it was doing to me.
And I-- so I'd actually ticked
all the boxes for my kids.
I had enough money.
I was able to do
this, but I was--
I transitioned into a job.
I was actually working for
a pharmaceutical company,
because they love nurses because
we have the knowledge and also
the ability to share the
wisdom of different drugs
and what have you.
But I didn't realize the
stress it was putting me under.
But because I had
to be super mom
and do all the
things I had to do,
I just let that--
I just buried it.
I pushed it down.
I tucked it under the carpet
and just thought, never mind.
Just get on with it.
You're fine.
Everything's fine.
And of course it wasn't.
And the years went by when I was
pharmaceutical repping-- two,
three years.
And then I really
got my wake up call.
It was like, you're
not going to listen
to how stressed you are so your
body is going to shout at you.
So I was-- I'd actually attended
a big conference-- a sales
conference in the
north of England.
And desperate to get
back home and to get away
from all the hype
and stuff that I--
just doesn't sit well with
me, I thought I'd just drive.
I just gotta get home.
So it was in the
middle of the night.
I started to drive home.
And as I was driving
on a motorway--
and this was before the time of
mobile phones-- I went blind.
And--
-This is what happened in '96.
That happened in '96.
And I was-- I mean, I must have
had a flock of people around me
in the spirit world that
were taking care of me.
Or someone was,
because I managed
to pull over on the side of
the road and stop the car.
And the shock that I'd
actually lost my sight.
It was dark.
It was-- it was winter.
It was like 2 or 3
o'clock in the morning.
No mobile phones.
Couldn't communicate
with anyone.
And that was it.
Suddenly my life had
been taken away from me.
And that really
was my-- that was
my turning point in my life.
That was just that
moment where I thought,
well, you know, what now?
What have I done?
What have I done
to deserve this?
Why me?
Wha-- the fear, the shock.
Every-- my whole life
had just been taken away.
So it was a hard experience.
You didn't have anything to do
with out of body experiences
or beautiful feelings of-- no.
It was terrible.
It was horrifying.
It was absolutely--
I mean, I was scared.
I was fearful.
I was-- I was angry.
I was-- it was everything--
all those hard emotions all
came to me at the same time as
I sat there on the hard shoulder
thinking, wow.
What now?
What's happened?
And disbelief.
You know, why?
What?
You can't.
You know, rubbing your eyes.
Why?
It can't have happened.
It was sort of-- and
nothing had led up to it.
I didn't-- I hadn't
had blinding headaches
before or-- and so
that was a really,
really super tough moment.
And you can imagine sitting
there just thinking,
oh, well, my life was over.
I couldn't see.
And then you just think
of all the things--
you wouldn't see your children.
You wouldn't be able to see--
wouldn't be able to do my job.
How was I going to survive?
Everything was just
going through my head.
But, you know, in
hindsight, that actually--
it was that moment-- that
experience has enabled--
has enabled me to do everything
else I've done in my life so--
What change have
you made from there?
Because then you
regained your eyesight.
But something-- it
didn't come back, though.
No.
I mean, it was
interesting, because I
sat there for a few hours.
And because no mobile
phones, and I had no sight,
I just literally sat there.
And after about two or three
hours, my sight returned.
And you can imagine the
blessings, the thankfulness,
the-- God, I'll-- I will look
at my life now and see what went
wrong, what I'm doing,
and-- and I remember
driving home thinking, OK.
You know, I will really
look at what my life's about
and where I really
need to change things.
And I thought, well, the
only place to start to change
is yourself.
And I'd never been on the
trail of personal development
before ever.
I'd always been such
a-- I love my kids.
I love being a mom.
And so whenever I had
that time, I was-- just
immersed myself in family life.
But I thought,
it's all about-- I
have to start to change myself.
My children were--
it wasn't like I
could just give up my job
because my children weren't
of that age.
I still had to be able
to fund their lives.
So I just thought, all right.
Let's start and change
things wherever I can.
And I read something in the
newspaper about, you know,
come to this be
positive workshop.
You know?
And I just-- I've got to go.
And it was a day's workshop.
And it was something
like that that
really gave me the
appetite that actually
it's so simple to change.
We just have to
start to analyze,
become aware of who we
are and what we're doing.
And I realized-- I would
sort of take a 24 hour period
and how I actually--
what was happening
to me in that period of time.
And I started to
listen to my phone
calls I was making to people.
And 90% of the words that
both me and the person I
was on the phone
to were negative.
We were talking about bad
things that happened to us.
We complained.
We moaned.
And I thought, god, and how
long have I been doing that?
So it was such a wake
up call, so I started
to get this awareness of all the
negativity that was around me,
even as much as from looking
in-- reading the newspaper.
I was opening the
newspaper every day,
just putting on the radio.
And it was still
all negative stuff.
And then I would
pick up the phone,
and I'd tell people
about the negative stuff
I'd read in the paper.
And then I would
complain about my job,
and then I'd-- and I just
thought, no, this has to stop.
So for about three
or four months,
I refused to read a newspaper.
I didn't watch the news.
I didn't turn on
the radio to listen
to any of this negativity.
And I became aware
of my own language.
And every time I started to
use a negative word or a word
with any negative connotation,
I would literally seal my mouth.
I'd stop.
It was like I
would-- I had this--
it was a real
absolute commitment
to stopping the negative words.
And in turn, even
if I would say,
well, I'm going to
say positive words.
And I would say, well,
I like this cake.
I thought, no, I don't like it.
I love it.
So I would put the positive
emotion into something,
even though it
sounded like it was
over the top or exaggerating.
But to raise the
way I felt inside.
And it was really interesting,
because I felt the difference
in myself quite quickly.
And then when people started
to notice the difference in me,
it was really interesting.
Because I'd have
people who I'd had
this moaning relationship with.
And like it didn't sort
of fit them anymore,
because they wondered--
well, you've changed.
What's the matter with you?
What's happened?
And because it's
quite threatening when
one person completely changes.
And in the circle of
people I had at that time,
we were fueling each
other with negativity.
And it was quite interesting.
So I actually had to distance
myself from some of my friends
and family that I'd had that
relationship with, because it
wasn't helping me at that time.
And I didn't know
how to deal with it.
So I literally went
on a negativity fast.
[LAUGHTER]
I went on a positive diet.
You were probably
silent at that time then.
Yes.
It was really interesting how--
but the change-- and I was--
but I always felt
sorry for my children,
because they were-- must
have been about-- say,
13 and 15, something
like that at the time--
maybe slightly younger.
But they had this mom
who wouldn't allow
the word no in the house and
wouldn't allow any negativity
or complaining.
I would just turn it around.
I'd say, oh, come on.
Let's just get on with it.
Let's do it.
And let's look at
the bright side.
And I'd sing all
these positive songs
and put positive records
on and fill the house
with sort of comedy
and-- I just had to-- it
was a real shift in energy.
And I just went 100%
full out to do that.
And that's how I managed to
turn myself around so quickly.
So then the job could not be
the same-- that your friends
were not the same.
You started having, of course,
different conversation--
attracting different
things, I guess.
Yeah, totally.
And I think that is the most
exciting thing-- is that once
you do make that shift.
And that's why I say it's not
that difficult, because it was
only becoming aware actually
of what you're saying
and what you're doing.
But when I started to
change, of course, it
was really interesting the
different people I did meet
and the different way I had
to manage my day at work.
I was still stressed at
work, because I realized
I was completely off my path.
I wasn't doing
what made me happy.
So it made me start
to become more
aware of what made me happy.
So when I wasn't at
work, or when I had
time to be with the
children, I would
make sure I was
filling those moments
with things that made me happy.
And that for me was-- you
know, sitting down one night
and writing a list--
actually what makes me happy?
When was the last time I did it?
Gosh, well, let's try
and do it this weekend.
Let's get out in
the countryside.
Let's go to the beach.
But it was-- I'd
forgotten to actually
incorporate those things into
my life that make me happy.
And that's one thing
I would say to anyone.
It's the key key to making
your day, your week,
your year the best it
can be-- is remembering
what makes you happy.
And I think we get so caught
up in what we should be doing
or where we should be going
or who we should be with,
and we stop thinking--
remembering what
makes us as individuals happy.
So that's my one
very important tip.
Honoring that all the time.
And because we-- I guess we also
reinvent ourselves continuously
once we're in this process.
Then we need to check
that back again and again.
That is so true.
Constantly.
And I do that even today.
I mean, most days
when I wake up,
I-- I have this sort
of positive journal
that I've always kept
doing ever since then.
And I will just make sure
I check in with myself.
I would say almost every
day unless I'm in, you know,
some bomb territory, because
I do front line aid work.
So sometimes I'm not
able to do that writing.
But mostly, I will make sure I
start my day thinking, right.
You know, what-- where am I?
What am I doing?
What's making me happy?
What's in my day that's
going to be really fun?
And make sure there's
something every day
that's really honoring that
side of me that makes me happy.
Beautiful.
You spread it on
then to everyone else.
-Yeah.
-It's contagious.
It's a magnet for other good
things and for other people
to allow them to be happy, also.
-Yeah.
On the cover of your book,
we see kids-- happy kids
laughing and-- and being kids.
[LAUGHTER]
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Where-- where were
you right there?
And tell us about your
humanitarian work.
Yeah, so I-- I've
been a humanitarian aid
worker for 12 years.
I always work with
the private sector.
And I'm absolutely
passionate about it,
because the private sector
are the most underused
resource in development work.
And they are-- they have such an
amazing approach to challenged
communities and
to aid development
that-- it's something
very, very important to me.
So all my aid work,
I've worked with them.
I've covered very big disasters,
like the Asian tsunami in 2004
that most of us remember who
were, you know, at adult life
then.
And Boxing Day
2004 when Asia was
really turned up on its head.
I've worked in Pakistan, and
that's the picture on the book.
After-- because I
was-- I got noted
that I did some really good
work with the private sector
after the tsunami.
And so they asked
me to go and speak
at a conference in
Pakistan to inspire
the business
leaders there as how
they could make a difference.
And that's how I got
first introduced.
And the big earthquake
had happened in Pakistan.
And it's-- I have this
very strange trait in me,
and my friend comment-- she
said, when everyone else is
rushing out, you're rushing in.
So when there's a big
disaster or a problem,
I know that I have to go.
It's just something
that's in me.
So when the
earthquake happened, I
knew that I had to
go and-- and spread
this word of how the private
sector could make a difference.
And in Pakistan, I was there
from about 2007-- 2006, 2007,
2008.
for two years.
And they've-- they
had many different
complications happening at that
time apart from the earthquake.
They had cyclones and floods.
And they've got a lot of
very, very poor areas.
So I was able to really
get out onto the front line
and make a big difference
in many different ways
while I was there.
What do you-- what have--
what were you telling
those business-- those
entrepreneurs-- the people
there that you were
talking to on how
to deal with the
situation and-- and start
their business back again?
How-- was it difficult
to find the words,
or were you just really
just so tuned in that you
were-- we want to hear this.
Because we always feel like
we're having, you know,
really big challenges.
But when we look
at huge challenges,
then we kind of feel--
it's comforting,
but at the same time, it can
give us a lot more energy
and creativity to
go on with our lives
and so that we can
free ourselves up, too,
to help others.
-Yes.
I mean, I-- throughout
my aid work,
my philosophy is a hand
up, not a hand out.
I've seen too many communities
become beggars because
around the world, especially
when there's a big disaster,
of course in the
emergency phase,
it's absolutely essential
that we have this outpouring
of gifts and-- and items
that people can then
start to recover,
whether it's water,
whether it's blankets,
whether it's tents.
But there's a level when
you have to say right now,
we have to make them
independent again
and rebuild their own lives.
And it's so, so important.
So what I do and what
I help to coordinate
is the private sector to be able
to come in and help to see how
there are market opportunities
for those people who
have lost everything to be
able to rebuild their lives.
And I'll tell you one story.
After the Asian tsunami,
I was working in Thailand.
And the area that was
hit there was really
a very high tourist area.
And it was many of the
hotels that were hit
and were washed away.
So as a nurse, I was there
right at the beginning,
and I was able to help
in a first aid way.
So I was staying in some of the
survivors' camps and helping.
But what I could
see was that there
was so many people
who had previously
worked in the hotels.
They were the gardeners,
the bell boys, the cleaners.
And what happened was when
those hotels were washed away,
their livelihoods
were washed away.
And those hotels were
not going to be rebuilt
for a very long time if ever.
And when they started
bringing me their children
and saying, Linda, can you
take care of our children now?
It was like the alarm
bells were ringing.
Not a chance.
Now we must come in and start
to see how these people can have
their dignity and
their self esteem
back and be able to really
earn their own money
and look after
their own children.
So what did I do?
I went back to
Bangkok, and I gathered
businesspeople together.
And I said, I want you to come
with me to the front line.
And with your
business approach, I
want you to look at the people
that we're trying to help-- so
their education level, their
skills set, their abilities,
their capacities to learn.
Look at the environment.
Look at the-- the market
opportunities for something
they can do as
entrepreneurs to earn
their own money to be able
to stand on their own feet.
So it was wonderful.
They came with me, and
it was still very soon
after the big disaster
so I knocked on the door
of the head of the Admiralty.
And this lovely Navy chap
gave me two helicopters.
So I flew these people
around the worst hit areas.
We landed.
They spoke to the villagers.
They visited the villagers.
They looked at the
environment and the geography.
Then they went back to Bangkok.
Within about three or
four days they said,
we've got some ideas.
We've done some market research.
And this is what we
think could work.
And what they had seen, which
I wouldn't have seen as an aid
worker-- they
noticed that lining
the coast where the
wave had hit were acres
and acres of rubber trees.
And these rubber trees had
been ignored for many years
because of tourism.
What's a rubber tree?
Sorry, because English
is my second language.
Rubber trees-- basically,
it's rubber on your shoe--
like the soles of
your shoes and soles
of your trainers, that's rubber.
And what it was is that their
grandparents had harvested
rubber from the trees.
You-- all you need
is one sharp knife,
and as you score the tree,
the white glue like rubber
comes out.
You then sort of add
a few bits to it.
You make it into a big sheet.
You put it through a mangle.
And you have rubber
that you can then
sell to the shoe
factories, to whoever uses
rubber-- for tires, whatever.
And the businesspeople
had noticed
that there was this resource
that had laid dormant.
No one had used it
because of the--
Tourism.
--easy money, easy money
to be made from tourism.
And within weeks, we just gave
this idea to the community.
They said, yeah, we-- yeah, of
course we know how to do it.
But-- you know, our
grandparents had done it.
How much money will it cost for
you to start up in business?
Well, we need one knife,
and we need a mangle,
which might cost $100.
They were back up and running.
They were earning four
times the amount of money
they earned as a bell boy,
gardener, or a cleaner.
They were independent.
They were earning-- they
were successful entrepreneurs
within months.
I went back two
years later, three
years later, five years later.
They were still
successful entrepreneurs.
That is why I'm so
passionate about bringing
the private sector in
to make a difference.
So when I go-- whether I
go to Pakistan, whether I
go anywhere in the world.
And that's how I got to
work with Richard Branson.
It's-- it's really using
the private sector,
because they have such great
skills that they are very
successful in business with.
And they make their
profit-- you apply
that to a challenged community.
It's win-win for everyone.
How exciting for those
entrepreneurs, as well,
to get their brain
together to help, to serve,
to-- to find new ideas.
I mean, their heart must have
totally opened up, as well.
And it must have
changed their lives.
Yeah.
And actually, I have
just recently launched
something called Be the
Change, Business Leaders
at the Frontline.
And why?
Because I know that this-- I've
seen it work so many times.
It's so beautiful.
And what I love-- it
is totally win-win.
Because they go, and
it's not about money.
Be the Change, Business
Leaders at the Frontline--
we're not asking for
money as a donation.
We're asking them to come and
use their brilliant brains
to make a difference.
But when they come
and they visit--
and I've just come back from
a trip to Nepal where I've-- I
took two heads of
corporates and two self
made millionaire entrepreneurs.
And they came with me
to the high Tibetan
area on the Nepal border.
And they went from
their five star life,
of course-- they're very,
very successful businessmen--
with me, and they
basically lived in a cave
for two or three nights.
They had-- there was
no running water.
There was no electricity.
No sanitation.
We could make a
TV show right now.
[LAUGHTER]
And what superstars they were.
Within days, they--
because of the way
they think and they
know and they approach,
they had water projects
happening and on--
and women's empowerment
projects happening
with crafts and many--
just skills development.
And when they came
down from this village,
they all said to me, our lives
have been changed forever.
Now we really
know-- we appreciate
the unconditional love that
we were shown up there,
the generosity of the people,
the happiness of the people
who have nothing.
And each of them said
to me-- and to camera--
that it had changed their lives.
Now to me that is a real
blessing and a real win-win,
because these people-- they
are the engine of the world.
They are the ones that
manage thousands of millions
of people themselves
in their own right.
And they had such a
happiness and such a spring
in their step when
they came down
after having made such a huge
difference to the community.
And also the effect it
had on their own lives.
So the gratitude and the
blessings for all those things
that are happening is-- it gives
me my-- my passion, my purpose,
my reason of being-- my
reason of being alive.
And this is what I've
devoted my life to.
Yeah.
What advice would
you give to people
looking for their life purpose
that want to contribute?
Where-- where
shall they look at?
Where shall we look at?
Well, always start at home.
Always start at every single
day you wake up in the morning.
Because I'm really getting
passionate about this
that it's to do
with our attitude--
how we can make a difference
to anyone's day at any time.
You know, smile
at the bus driver.
Smile at the girl
at the cashiers.
Give someone a compliment.
That we can do so easily.
It costs absolutely nothing.
But the difference it
can make to someone's day
and the domino effect it will
have-- number one-- is huge.
So with your-- and even if
you're feeling a bit down
or grumpy yourself-- just
because you've turned around
yourself to be a bit
positive to someone else,
it'll come back at
you in bucket loads.
So that's the first thing.
Start in a very simple way,
but in a very practical way.
And then I believe that
when you have that ability
to serve someone
sometime during that day,
whether it's making
them a cup of tea,
whether it's helping them
do their hair for them
or-- just little bits
of service will start
to then grow in your life.
And that abundance
flows back to you.
And if you want to do things
like I do and actually look
to actually help communities
which are very much less
fortunate, in the
back of my book
I've given some
agencies that I feel are
doing a very, very good job.
But there's-- if you
look on the internet,
you look in the resources that
you have available to you now,
there is always
somewhere you can help.
And do look.
Get out there and look.
Find out.
Ask people.
People always come to me,
like after the Asian tsunami.
I was sort of a
resource for volunteers,
because everyone knew that it
didn't matter who they were.
I would place them somewhere.
And this is another little
story I'll tell you,
because I think this absolutely
shows that every single person
can make a difference.
So after the Asian
tsunami, and I
was in the survivors' camp
where there was so much grief
and-- and disaster.
And I just thought,
OK, what would really
make a difference here quickly?
Because there were so many
children, orphans that had been
penned in case
they were kidnapped
and all that sort of thing
that happens after a disaster.
And I thought yes, I know.
We need magicians.
My father's a magician.
My grandfather's a magician.
And I'm a magician actually.
But it came to
me, and I thought,
I'm going to call the
head of The Magic Circle
and see if they'll
send someone out.
And so I spoke to my
father, and my father said,
Linda, you're crazy.
You're in one of the biggest
natural-- global disasters
ever.
And you're asking
for a magician.
What can a magician do in
the site of a disaster?
I said, trust me.
Just trust me.
So I spoke to the head
of The Magic Circle.
And he said, come on.
You know, no one's going to
go out into a big disaster
area like that.
And I said, just put the word
out amongst the magicians.
Let's see what's-- see
if anyone responds.
One guy did.
And within weeks,
this magician had
flown out with all
his magic wands
and his colorful balloons.
Language-- no problem.
No communication problem
whatsoever, of course,
with magic.
And he stayed for six weeks.
And he moved up
and all the camps.
A magician in the heart
of the biggest disaster
we've had for many, many years.
And the healing that he
did in those communities--
the smiling, the
laughter that started.
A lot of art therapy
was happening,
and the colors were
changing from black to blue
as they started to heal.
And while I was out there,
because the buzz was so great,
Winston Churchill's
granddaughter, Arabella
Churchill, called
me and said, Linda,
I've got a mobile circus.
Can I bring it out?
So we had clowns, and we had
fire eaters and stilt walkers.
And the humor.
I mean, laughter is
the best medicine.
Humor, kindness,
smiling-- it heals us.
So I always say never think that
you-- whatever your life skills
are, you can make a difference.
As the magician did.
-Beautiful.
How would you define
leadership now?
Is that changing?
Do you feel leadership
is changing?
Do you feel we need a
new type of leaders?
How would you define leadership?
That's a really
interesting question.
Leaders now, I believe and what
I see in the business world--
the ones that really lead
with-- from their heart,
as well as from their
head, when they have that--
that combination of both,
that is where a people will
do more for them than ever.
They'll-- they bring
out the best in people,
as well as bringing out
the best in themselves.
And I-- I believe
leaders-- and I'll give
this-- another little story.
I love stories.
You're good at that, too.
When I was working with KPMG
after the tsunami-- and they
were just tremendous.
And they allowed their
staff to take some time
off one day a week,
one day a month--
just bits and bobs to
be able to help people.
And these were
visionary leaders who
knew that it was a time for that
outpouring of love to be there
and to actually be part of that
repairing this-- the disaster.
About six months after
this had been taking place,
and they hadn't been helping
that much but a little--
the global chair of
KPMG came to Thailand.
And he spoke at a
conference there
and to thank the
people that had helped.
And he said, but
there was a very
strange thing happened while
you were all out there helping.
Our productivity went up.
And he said, but you
were working less hours.
And I think this
realization from companies
that the more we feel good
about being able to help others,
it actually makes us-- the
feel good factor is huge.
So we're able to give
the best to our work
when we're actually really
sharing the best of ourselves
and really making a
difference to other people.
And I like these
really tangible results
that companies and
business leaders have seen
that is the combination
of heart and head
that really brings
the best results.
Do you see other big
corporations like that that
are doing these kind of things?
Because I know KPMG was
very big in keeping,
I guess, some of
their employees,
or Deloitte's, as well.
But is there-- even though there
was a crisis, they-- you know,
is there other big
corporation like that?
I have witnessed
and worked closely
alongside Virgin-- incredible
company for doing that.
Manpower also.
And I'm sure there
are many, many others
that I haven't worked with
who also do the same thing.
But there's loads
more we can do.
And I think-- you
know, I feel now
that this is such an important
part for all business leaders
and companies to
embrace, because it's
such a win-win situation.
Because it can have such--
I think you even-- I think
the companies even attract,
you know, the most successful
people to work for
them when they have
that attitude of giving back.
I think it's a very attractive
thing for companies to do.
I think-- for
example, with my Be
the Change-- when people are
able to have an experience,
it grows them in so many
ways when they're completely
out of their comfort
zone, when they're really
being able to help
communities which
they would not normally meet.
It's probably far better than
a lot of the communication
exercises or the human
resource exercises
that they do within
their own country
within their own people.
And it--
The team buildings or the--
And it probably-- within three
days with me on the front line,
you could probably,
you know, cut
down a year's training
in a general way
because it's so intense.
And it's such a big
shift they have.
And also, they're making
such a big difference
to the challenged countries--
areas we have in the world.
And I think that-- I believe
this is what's going to make
the biggest difference in the
world-- when we start bringing
these brilliant brains to really
look at some of the worst--
some of the seemingly
intractable problems
that we have around
the world, I think
we've just got to apply these
brilliant brains to them
to really make a difference.
So that is why you have
created Be the Change?
And-- and I love that
quote, too, from Gandhi.
Be the change that you want
to witness in the world
or see in the world.
-Yes.
It's-- it's Mahatma Gandhi,
and it's be the change
you want to see in the world.
Because I feel if we--
each of us do that,
we each stand in our own light
and recognize our own skills--
and that is the
skill of a magician.
That is a skill of
a business leader.
That is a skill of a
housewife and a mom.
Everyone-- if we recognize our
own qualities and honor, which
many of us aren't very good at.
We tend to put ourselves down.
But if we honor those qualities
and we use those qualities
to make a difference and be
the change we want to see
in the world, I
think it's a very
powerful thing that
every single person--
and the younger, the better.
I love, love, love taking
young people, also, as well
as my senior business leaders.
I'm a busy person.
When I take the school
leavers-- the 18-year-olds,
the 20-year-olds.
Especially we know-- we've got
to-- we've got to recognize
they are tomorrow's leaders.
So if we can affect people
at that age in their life,
then it will affect
their whole career.
And it will affect the way
they see and the way they lead
and the way they live.
Beautiful.
So is there-- because the world
is kind of going a little bit
upside down right now--
do you see things--
or what is your--
how do you vision--
how do you see that things
are going to turn out?
Or what things would you
like to see in the world?
A lot of people are scared.
I mean, it's a little
bit chaotic right now.
There might be even
more chaos soon.
What would you recommend?
Well, to start with is-- is
really cut down on the fear.
Because actually, I travel all
the time all over the world.
And I've worked on the front
line in places like Pakistan
and on the Afghan border.
I've worked in a lot
of conflict areas.
But when you get to know the
essence of each human being
in each country,
whatever their religion--
I've worked with every
religion on Earth.
I've worked in every type
of tradition and culture.
When it comes to, we're
all exactly the same.
We all love our kids.
We all want to be happy.
We all have parents we
want to take care of.
We all need to have
a full stomach.
We all want to have
a good night's sleep.
And actually I really want--
I would love-- the more you
really start to get to know-- I
love telling the Kenyan people
in the Masai Mara tribe about
the lovely Pakistani women
I know in Islamabad.
And I share stories,
because our lives--
we have such crossovers.
And we have such great values
to share with each other.
And I think actually
we are one world.
There are all these
boundaries and divisions.
And there's a lot
of fear that-- that
gets built up through
misunderstanding--
not understanding.
So that's my big thing-- why I
am passionate about doing talks
to people-- inspirational talks
and to really get to understand
different cultures
and-- and religions
and to really see that
we're all the same
and actually cut
down on the fear.
Because I have lived
in their houses.
I've-- when I go to a country,
I don't stay in a big hotel.
I live in the villages.
I eat their food.
I-- I go to their--
wherever they worship.
I go with them.
And I really-- I feel it.
I carry it in my heart, and
I can share this with people.
And that actually
minimizes-- why people
will go with me
to the front line
is because I've done all this.
Because I really have
worn the moccasins
of most of the big societies
and countries in the world.
And I do have that
depth of understanding.
That's why I love taking
politicians with me.
I love taking Royalty.
I love taking business leaders.
I love taking young people.
Because that's how
you understand what's
actually happening
in the people--
to the lives of those
people-- when you actually
go and sit with
them and have a cup
of tea in their environment.
So the-- you are
a magician of life.
Could we say that?
No?
Well, what are-- you think are
the ingredients or the things
that we need to know
if we want to become
also magician in life?
You talked about some of
them, but I feel we can all be
alchemists and metal into gold.
And we have this capacity,
but we're not raised that way.
We're not taught that way.
You were lucky
enough to be raised
in a family of magicians.
And you had to make
your own decision
and be courageous and step in.
But what makes a good magician?
Well, I-- I really feel
that the essence of it
is finding-- really trying
to get to grips of what
you-- what makes you happy.
Because that will show
you what your purpose is.
You've constantly got to
get-- go back to those moments
where you feel in your
happiest, most blissful state.
That will give you the clue
to what really you're here
to share in-- with the world.
Go back to the real basics.
And it could be-- whether
it's, you know, writing.
It could be that
you-- you know, you
lose yourself when you're just
writing stories about things.
And maybe that's the way
you're going to share
your gift in the world.
That's where your magic
is going to come from.
So I would suggest
to people is really
to go back to those basics
of what makes you happy.
And then honor that and
find out how you can weave
that into your day to day life.
And it's likely to be that's
what your purpose is about.
Because the more you're living
on purpose with your passion,
you're going to be happiest.
And you're going to be able
to share that with the world.
Another trick I've
learned over the years--
and when people say, well,
I don't know how to do that.
I say, OK, well, tell
me who your heroes are.
Because it's very interesting.
When you start to think
who your heroes are,
start to think what they've
done, what their qualities are.
It will then give you
another idea of who you are.
Because when you-- your
heroes are actually--
those elements are inside
you or are about to be born.
And it's a very, very
interesting exercise.
I mean, for me, I was-- I
love Florence Nightingale.
She was a nurse.
I love--
And a mystic.
Absolutely.
Alexandra David-Neel.
OK?
Great-- one of the first
female expeditioners to Tibet.
You know, the
courage, the bravery.
And because the people
that I admire-- actually,
those qualities I see
are the ones that I
am bringing out in myself.
So do that exercise.
Really start to look about,
you know, who are your heroes
and why.
Another good clue is to
where-- what you're here for
and the great qualities for
you to share with the world.
I love that.
Oh, my goodness.
We can also think
of superheroes.
Absolutely.
I mean, because--
you know, that's why
we-- we-- most of-- well,
I think every single person
has heroes.
Yeah?
Yeah.
A lot of people get
stopped by money.
I cannot contribute help,
because I need to pay
the bills, or I-- I won't
have the money for such
a big project or what have you.
What is your relationship
to money and to abundance?
Well, I mean, I-- I have a very
interesting life where because
of my aid work I decided
that I would sell everything
I own in the world.
So I don't have a house.
I don't have a car.
I literally have one suitcase.
That's all I own.
And I sleep at my friend's
house at the moment.
And I have lots of
friends all over the world
so I'm never homeless,
but I don't own anything.
So material
possessions-- I've never
had that relationship
with needing to have
a lot of material things.
That's just a personal thing.
But what I would say
regarding abundance
is that the more you
give of yourself,
you really do receive.
And that doesn't mean-- so
it's-- I actually believe
abundance comes not
so much of giving
money but from giving yourself.
So it's literally-- you can
give of yourself by saying
next time I'm with
my friend, I'm going
to sit and listen to them.
That is the biggest gift
you can give anyone--
is just to be quiet and listen.
To smile at someone.
But it's all about-- it's really
being present and-- giving
of yourself is a gift.
You could help people if you
don't have money to contribute.
In fact, my whole
thing is a hand up,
not a hand out means
it's not about money.
It's about sitting with a child
and reading a story with them.
Sitting with them as they're
coloring in and talking to them
and telling your stories
and sharing stories.
Starting with
the one around us.
Absolutely.
I mean, and that--
and the domino effect
and the generational
effect-- you have no idea,
but you give of yourself.
And that's where I think--
and that costs nothing.
Most of the best things in life,
as we know actually, are free.
They don't cost anything at all.
Just get out into nature.
So don't ever think
money can ever stop you.
In fact, money is a blessing.
And I'm not against
money at all.
I think money is wonderful.
But it's absolutely
not something we
need to be happy or abundant.
We just give of ourselves.
How do you get people
to-- I remember actually
the-- the story of Lynne
Twist shows up in my mind,
because she used to
be able to collect--
or still probably-- huge amounts
of money to support others.
What is-- is there a
trick to that or something
that you have learned or you
want to share when you want
to raise money, whether it's
for ourselves or a project
or for others?
-Yes.
I think--
-And enroll people into--
Yeah.
And again, I think it's--
it's all about being
inspirational and being true and
authentic and from your heart.
So if there's something you
really feel very passionate
about, and you feel
that you really
know that you can make a
difference doing that, I think
that's what inspires people.
People-- you can't get
away from authenticity.
If that's what they see,
they'll see it in your eyes.
They'll just feel it as
it comes from your heart
as you're saying the words.
But I-- I-- again, I'm not
a fund raiser particularly.
But I just speak from my
heart about situations
and about places.
And that just attracts
people like a magnet.
Well, you attracted
the two helicopters.
I mean, that's very
costly and expensive.
That's-- maybe
it's not in money,
but it's a big contribution.
So it's-- it's the same.
You have to enroll
people into it
and to giving those resources.
-Yes, it is.
But, you know, have--
have a really--
have a-- have a higher purpose.
Have a-- have a reason
why you know it's really
going to make and do good.
And actually
people's hearts melt.
They can see that
you-- your agenda
is to do good for others.
And the doors open.
Beautiful.
Is there a last story
or word or something
that you would like
to share with us
that feels important
to say right
now within this conversation?
Very interesting.
I just-- so many stories.
But really do encourage
from the youngest person
that you know to
really-- to give them
a heart opening experience.
I've got a grandson
who is four years old.
And it's just so lovely
when he-- when I--
when we do something together.
And we see maybe a little old
lady sitting on a park bench
on her own looking a bit sad.
We'll go and sit next
to her and have a chat
and just spend some
time with someone
who you think is looking
a bit lonely or a bit sad.
And start this process
with-- with the children
or with the young adults.
As young as you
can, just instill
that-- that attitude
of gratitude,
that service
feeling within them.
Because it actually
makes their life so rich.
And once it's started-- I
mean, why do you think I
will never retire until I die?
Because what I do is addictive.
When you help people, you are--
you are rich beyond words,
beyond belief,
beyond bank balance.
And that's what
we should instill
into the youngest of our
friends and our children
and our grandchildren.
And then they will
live a magical life.
Well, beautiful.
Thank you so much for
this juicy conversation.
Wow.
Inspiring, inspiring.
Thank you, Linda.
You're the author of
"Marmalade and Machine Guns."
Thank you so much.
Thank you for
this conversation.
We're here in Windsor in the UK.
And we send you much love.
Thank you.
Bye bye.